.TH NEXUSD 8 "2026-05-29" "NEXUS Protocol" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
nexusd \- NEXUS mesh network daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nexusd
[\fB\-p\fR \fIPORT\fR]
[\fB\-i\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-r\fR \fIROLE\fR]
[\fB\-m\fR]
[\fB\-f\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nexusd
is the multi-role NEXUS mesh daemon for development and embedded deployments.
It initialises a NEXUS node, registers one or more transports, and runs the
PRISM (Proactive\-Reactive Intelligent Segmented Mesh) routing engine.
.PP
Unlike
.BR pillard (8),
which is purpose\-built for public Internet relay, nexusd supports every
NEXUS node role (CLIENT, RELAY, GATEWAY, ANCHOR, PILLAR, VAULT) and enables
UDP multicast by default, making it suitable for LAN mesh testing, firmware
development, and gateway deployments.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-p " PORT"
TCP listen port (default: 4242).
.TP
.BI \-i " FILE"
Identity file path.  If the file does not exist a new identity is generated
and saved.  Default: \fI/var/lib/nexus/nexusd.identity\fR (root) or
\fI$HOME/.nexus/nexusd.identity\fR (unprivileged).
.TP
.BI \-r " ROLE"
Node role: \fBclient\fR (1), \fBrelay\fR (2), \fBgateway\fR (3),
\fBanchor\fR (4), \fBpillar\fR (5), \fBvault\fR (6).  Default: \fBrelay\fR.
.TP
.B \-m
Enable UDP multicast transport for LAN neighbour discovery.
.TP
.B \-f
Run in foreground (do not double\-fork).  Use with systemd \fBType=simple\fR.
.TP
.B \-v
Enable verbose debug logging.
.TP
.B \-h
Print help and exit.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM, SIGINT
Graceful shutdown.
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Re\-announce on all transports immediately.
.TP
.B SIGUSR1
Dump routing and traffic statistics to the log.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/nexus/nexusd.identity
Default identity file location (privileged).
.TP
.I $HOME/.nexus/nexusd.identity
Fallback identity file location (unprivileged).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pillard (8),
.BR nexus\-cli (1)
.SH AUTHORS
NEXUS Protocol contributors.
