.TH NEXUS\-CLI 1 "2026-05-29" "NEXUS Protocol" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nexus\-cli \- NEXUS Protocol command\-line tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nexus\-cli
.IR command
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIarguments\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nexus\-cli
provides identity management, daemon control, and network diagnostic
utilities for the NEXUS mesh protocol.  It communicates with a running
.BR nexusd (8)
instance via a Unix\-domain socket, or with a
.BR pillard (8)
instance over TCP.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS identity
.TP
.B nexus\-cli identity generate
Generate a fresh Ed25519/X25519 identity keypair and print the short
address and public keys to stdout.  The identity is not saved.
.TP
.BI "nexus\-cli identity save " FILE
Generate a fresh identity and write it to \fIFILE\fR in the NEXUS binary
identity format.
.TP
.BI "nexus\-cli identity show " FILE
Load an existing identity from \fIFILE\fR and print its short address and
public keys.
.SS Daemon control (nexusd UDS)
These subcommands forward a single\-line command to a running nexusd process
over its Unix\-domain socket.
.TP
.BI "nexus\-cli send [--sock " PATH "] " PEER " " TEXT
Send a plaintext message to \fIPEER\fR (8\-hex\-digit short address) via nexusd.
.TP
.BI "nexus\-cli inbox [--sock " PATH ]
List stored messages in the anchor mailbox.
.TP
.BI "nexus\-cli status [--sock " PATH ]
Show node status: address, neighbor count, route count.
.TP
.BI "nexus\-cli announce [--sock " PATH ]
Trigger an immediate announce broadcast.
.PP
The \fB\-\-sock\fR option (default: \fI/tmp/nexusd.sock\fR) overrides the
nexusd Unix\-domain socket path.
.SS pillar\-probe
.TP
.BI "nexus\-cli pillar\-probe [--timeout " SECS "] [--admin\-port " PORT "] " HOST : PORT
Probe a NEXUS pillar server at \fIHOST:PORT\fR.  Establishes a TCP connection,
measures round\-trip time, and reports reachability.
.PP
If \fB\-\-admin\-port\fR is given, nexus\-cli additionally fetches the pillar's
web admin dashboard (started with pillard \fB\-A\fR) and extracts neighbor
count, mailbox depth, and uptime.
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " SECS"
Connection timeout in seconds (default: 5.0).
.TP
.BI \-\-admin\-port " PORT"
pillard web admin port for extended info (optional).
.PP
Example output:
.RS
.nf
host:    relay.example.com
port:    4242
rtt_ms:  12.4
status:  reachable
.fi
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print help and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Generate and display a new identity:
.RS
.nf
nexus\-cli identity generate
.fi
.RE
.PP
Save a new identity to a file and show its address:
.RS
.nf
nexus\-cli identity save ~/.nexus/my.identity
nexus\-cli identity show  ~/.nexus/my.identity
.fi
.RE
.PP
Probe a pillar and get admin stats:
.RS
.nf
nexus\-cli pillar\-probe relay.example.com:4242 \-\-admin\-port 8080
.fi
.RE
.PP
Send a message via a locally running nexusd:
.RS
.nf
nexus\-cli send \-\-sock /run/nexus/nexusd.sock deadbeef "hello"
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /tmp/nexusd.sock
Default nexusd Unix\-domain socket.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nexusd (8),
.BR pillard (8)
.SH AUTHORS
NEXUS Protocol contributors.
