.TH PILLARD 8 "2026-05-29" "NEXUS Protocol" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
pillard \- NEXUS Pillar Server (public Internet relay)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pillard
[\fB\-p\fR \fIPORT\fR]
[\fB\-i\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-c\fR \fIHOST\fB:\fIPORT\fR]...
[\fB\-m\fR]
[\fB\-V\fR]
[\fB\-f\fR]
[\fB\-M\fR \fIPORT\fR]
[\fB\-A\fR \fIPORT\fR]
[\fB\-C\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-K\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-r\fR \fIN\fB/\fIWINDOW\fR]
[\fB\-u\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-N\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pillard
is a NEXUS pillar server designed for 24/7 unattended operation on a public
VPS.  It listens on a TCP port for inbound connections from NEXUS nodes
sitting behind NAT or mobile networks, forwards mesh traffic between
connected peers, and stores\-and\-forwards messages for offline destinations
via the built\-in anchor mailbox.
.PP
Multiple pillard instances can be peered together with \fB\-c\fR to form a
redundant public backbone.  Inter\-pillar federation (digest/fetch gossip)
ensures that messages reach their destination even when a recipient connects
to a different pillar than the sender.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-p " PORT"
TCP listen port (default: 4242).
.TP
.BI \-i " FILE"
Identity file.  Generated and saved on first run if absent.
Default: \fI/var/lib/nexus/pillar.identity\fR.
.TP
.BI \-c " HOST:PORT"
Peer with another pillard instance.  Repeatable; maximum 8 peers.
pillard maintains persistent outbound connections to all listed peers.
.TP
.B \-m
Enable UDP multicast transport.  Off by default; only useful on LAN.
.TP
.B \-V
Start as VAULT (role=6) instead of PILLAR (role=5).  A VAULT has a larger
anchor mailbox and takes part in pillar\-tier store\-and\-forward.
.TP
.B \-f
Run in foreground (do not double\-fork).  Use with systemd \fBType=simple\fR.
.TP
.BI \-M " PORT"
Expose Prometheus \fB/metrics\fR on this TCP port.  Off when not specified.
.TP
.BI \-A " PORT"
Start a read\-only web admin dashboard on \fIhttp://127.0.0.1:PORT/admin\fR.
The page shows uptime, node address, neighbor table, mailbox depth, traffic
counters, and the last 64 log lines.  Off when not specified.  Bind to
loopback only; use a reverse proxy for remote access.
.TP
.BI \-C " FILE"
TLS certificate file (PEM).  When both \fB\-C\fR and \fB\-K\fR are
provided, pillard will accept TLS connections on port 4243 (requires the
binary to be built with \fBPILLARD_TLS=1\fR).
.TP
.BI \-K " FILE"
TLS private key file (PEM).  Must accompany \fB\-C\fR.
.TP
.BI \-r " N/WINDOW"
Rate\-warn threshold: log a WARN when any single peer sends more than
\fIN\fR announce packets within \fIWINDOW\fR seconds.  Example:
\fB\-r 60/60\fR warns at 60 announces/minute.  0 disables (default).
.TP
.BI \-u " PATH"
Unix\-domain admin socket path.
Default: \fI/run/nexus/pillard.sock\fR (privileged) or
\fI$HOME/.nexus/pillard.sock\fR (unprivileged).
Pass \fBoff\fR to disable.
.TP
.BI \-N " NAME"
Friendly display name pushed to every connecting peer as a NICKNAME message,
so clients show \(lqTel-Aviv\-Pillar\(rq instead of a raw 4\-byte address.
Maximum 32 characters.  Also configurable via the \fBPILLAR_NAME\fR
environment variable; the \fB\-N\fR flag takes precedence.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose debug logging.
.TP
.B \-h
Print help and exit.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM, SIGINT
Graceful shutdown: stops all threads, closes listeners, wipes node keys.
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Re\-announce on all transports immediately.
.TP
.B SIGUSR1
Dump routing and traffic statistics to the log.
.SH ADMIN SOCKET
The admin socket accepts single\-line commands terminated with a newline:
.TP
.B ping
Returns \fBpong\en\fR.
.TP
.B reload
Equivalent to SIGHUP.  Returns \fBok reload\en\fR.
.TP
.B stats
Returns a one\-line traffic summary.
.TP
.B shutdown
Equivalent to SIGTERM.
.TP
.B help
Lists available commands.
.PP
Example using socat:
.RS
.nf
echo reload | socat \- UNIX\-CONNECT:/run/nexus/pillard.sock
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/nexus/pillar.identity
Default identity file (privileged).
.TP
.I $HOME/.nexus/pillar.identity
Fallback identity file (unprivileged).
.TP
.I /run/nexus/pillard.sock
Default admin socket (privileged).
.TP
.I $HOME/.nexus/pillard.sock
Fallback admin socket (unprivileged).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PILLAR_NAME
Pre\-populates the friendly pillar name.  Overridden by \fB\-N\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Minimal public pillar with systemd:
.RS
.nf
pillard \-f \-p 4242 \-N "nyc\-01"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Paired pillars with metrics and admin dashboard:
.RS
.nf
pillard \-f \-p 4242 \-c ams.example.com:4242 \-M 9101 \-A 8080 \-N "nyc\-01"
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nexusd (8),
.BR nexus\-cli (1)
.SH AUTHORS
NEXUS Protocol contributors.
